So, we have said that we will measure the
time efficiency of algorithms only upto an
order of magnitude. So, we will express the
running time as a function t of n of the input
size n, but we will ignore constants. So,
we will only say that t of n is propositional
to n square or n log n or 2 to the n . So,
now, the next step is to have an effective
way of comparing these running times across
algorithms. If I know the order of magnitude
of 1 algorithm, and the order of magnitude
of another algorithm how do I compare?
So, the notation we need or the concept we
need is that of an upper bound which is given
by the notation big O. So, we say that a function
g of n is an upper bound for another function
t of n if beyond some point g of n dominates
t of n. Now, remember that g of n is going
to be now a function which is an order a magnitude.
So, we are thrown away all the constant factors
which we play a role in g of n. So, we allow
ourselves this constant. So, we say that it
is not g of n alone which dominates t of n,
but g of n times some constant.
So, there is a fixed constants c and beyond
some limits. So, there is an initial portion
where we do not care, but beyond this limit
we have that t of n always lies below c times
g of n. In this case c times g of n and is
an upper bound for t of n and we say that
t of n is big O of g of n.
So, let us look at an example. So, supposing
we have this function t of n is 100 and plus
5 then, we claim that it is big O of n square
now remember that n is suppose to be the input
size. So, the input size to a problem is always
going to be at least 1, there is no problem
that needs to be solved if your input is zero
and certainly we cannot have negative. So,
we are always having in mind the situation
that, n is bigger than or equal to 1. So,
if we now start with our function 100 n plus
5 then, if we choose n to be bigger than 5
then n will be bigger than this value. So,
we can say 100 n plus 5 is smaller than equal
to 100 n plus n.
And now we can collapse this as 101 right.
So, 100 n plus 5 is smaller than 101 provided
n is bigger than equal to 5, now, since n
is at least 1 n square is bigger than n. So,
101 times n is going to be smaller than 100
and 1 n square. So, by choosing n 0 to be
5 and c to be 101 we have established that
n square is an upper bound to 100 n plus 5.
So, 100 n plus 5 is big O of n square. Now,
we can do this using a slightly different
calculations, we can say that 100 n plus 5
is smaller than 100 n plus 5 n for n bigger
than 1 because n is at least 1. So, 5 times
n is going to be at least 5. So, now, if you
collapse is we get 105 n now, but the same
logic 105 n the smaller than 105 n square
whenever n is bigger than 1.
So, new way of establishing the same fact,
where we have chosen n 0 equal to 1 and c
equal to 105 right. So, n 0 and c or not unique
right depending on how we do the calculation
we might find different n 0 and different
c. But it does not matter how we choose them
so long as we can establish the fact that
beyond a certain n 0 there is a uniform constant
c such that c times g of n dominates t of
n. Notice that the same calculation can give
us a tighter upper bound, this is kind of
a loose upper bound we would expect that 100
n is smaller than n square. But we can also
say that this is big O of n, why is that?
Because if you just stop the calculation at
this point we do not come to this stage at
all you have establish that 100 n plus 5 is
less equal to 101. But, the same values n
0 equal to 5 and c equal to 101 this also
tells us that 100 n plus 5 is big O of n.
Likewise at this point if you just ignore
this step then we say that 100 n plus 5 is
smaller than 105 n. So, for n 0 equal to 1
and c equal to 105 you have established this.
Let us look at another example supposing we
look at 100 n square plus 20 n plus 5. Now,
again assuming that n is bigger than 1 we
know that we can multiply by n and do not
get any smaller. So, 20 n will be dominated
by 20 n square right and 5 will be dominated
by 5 times n times n 5 n square. So, I now
have 100 n square plus 20 n square plus 5
n square, is bigger than my original function
100 n square plus 20 n plus 5. So, I combine
these, I get 125 n square and now all I have
assumed is that, n is bigger than equal to
1. So, for n 0 equal to 1 and c equal to 125
we have that n square dominates 100 n square
plus 20 n plus 1. So, you can easily see that,
in general if I have a n square plus b n plus
c right this is going to be dominated by a
plus, b plus, c times n square right. So,
this is going to be less than this for all
n greater than equal to 1. So, we can generally
speaking, take a function like this and ignore
the lower terms because they are dominated
by the higher term and just focus on the value
with the highest exponent.
So, in this case in this whole thing n square
is the biggest term therefore, this whole
thing this going to be big O of n square.
So, this is a very typical shortcut that we
can take, you can just take an expression
ignore the coefficients pick the largest exponent
and choose that to be the big O right.
Now, we can also show that things are not
big O. So, for instance its intuitively clear
that, n cube is bigger than n square now,
how do we formally show that n cube is not
big O of n square. Well, supposing it was,
then there is exists some n 0, such that for
all n bigger than equal to n 0, n cube must
be smaller than or equal to c times n square
right. If this were big O of n square this
is what we must have. Now supposing, we choose
n is equal to c then we have on the left hand
side c cube, on the right hand side we have
c cube and certainly we have that c cube less
than equal to c cube. If i go to c plus 1
I will have c plus 1 whole cube and this side
I will have c times c plus 1 whole square
and now the problem is, this is bigger because
c plus 1 whole cube is bigger than c times
c plus 1 whole square.
Therefore, no matter what c we choose, if
we go to n equal to c we will find that inequality
that we want gets flipped around. Therefore,
there is no c that we can choose to make n
cubes smaller than c n square beyond a certain
point and therefore, this is not big O. So,
our intuitive idea that n cube grows faster
than n square can be formally proved using
this definition.
Now, here is a useful fact about big O, if
I have a function f 1 which is big O of g
1 and another function f 2 which is big O
of g 2 then, f 1 plus f 2 is actually dominated
by the max of g 1 and g 2. You might think
it is g 1 plus g 2 this is the obvious thing
that comes to mind looking at this, that f
1 plus f 2 is smaller than g 1 plus g 2, but
actually it is max.
How do we prove this? Well, is not very difficult.
By definition if f 1 is big O of g 1 there
exists some n 1 such that beyond n 1 f 1 is
dominated by c 1 of g 1 c 1 times g 1. Similarly,
if f 2 is big O of g 2 there is an n 2 such
that beyond n 2 f 2 is dominated by c 2 times
g 2 right. So, now, what we can do is we can
choose n 3 to be the maximum of n 1 and n
2, and we can choose c 3 to be the maximum
of c 1 and c 2. So, now, let us see what happens
beyond n 3, beyond n 3 both these inequalities
are effective. So, we have f 1 plus f 2 will
be less than c 1 times g 1 plus c 2 times
g 2 right. Because, this is beyond both n
1 and n 2 so, both f 1 is less than c 1 g
1 holds and f 2 less than c 2 g 2 holds. So,
I can add the 2 and, this is the first obvious
thing that we said is it g 1 plus g 2, but
now we can be a little clever we can say there
we have c 3. So, c 1 is smaller than c 3 because
this is the maximum c 2 is smaller than c
3. So, I can combine these and say that this
is less than c 3 g 1 plus c 3 g 2.
Now, having combined these I can of course,
push them together and say this is less then
c 3 times g 1 plus g 2. But g 1 plus g 2 if
I take the maximum of those then 2 times the
maximum will be bigger than that. So, I will
get this is less than c 3 times 2 times the
maximum of g 1 and g 2 right. I can take this
2 out and say that therefore, this is less
then equal to 2 c 3 times max of g 1 and g
2 right. So, now, if I take this as my n 0
and this as my c then I have established that
for every n bigger than n 0 namely maximum
n 1 and n 2 there is a constant which is 2
times the max of c 1 c 2 such that f 1 plus
f 2 is dominated by c times max of g 1 g 2.
Why is this mathematical fact useful to us?
So, very often when we are analyzing an algorithm,
it will have different phases. It will do
something in one part then it will continue
to some other thing and so, on. So, we could
have 2 phases, phase A which takes time big
O of g A and phase B which takes time big
O of g B. So, now, what is a good upper bound
for the overall running time of the algorithm.
So, the instinctive thing would be to say
g A plus g B. But what this result tells us
is that it is not g A plus g B that is useful
for the upper bound, but the maximum of g
A and g B right. In other words, when we are
analyzing an algorithm it is enough to look
at the bottle necks. It goes through many
steps look at the steps which take the maximum
amount of time, focus on those and that will
determine the overall running time of the
algortihm. So, when we look at a function,
an algorithm which has a loop, we typically
look at the loop how long does the loop take.
We ignore, may be the initialization that
takes place before the loop or some print
statement that takes place after the loop
because that does not contribute as much to
the complexity as the loop itself. So, when
we have multiple phases, it is the most inefficient
phase which dominates the overall behavior
and this is formalized by the result we just
saw.
Now, there is a symmetric notion to an upper
bound namely a lower bound. So, just like
we said that t of n is always lying below
c of... c times g of n. We might say that
t of n always lies above c times g of n and
this is described using this notation omega.
So, this is just a symmetric definition which
just says that t of n is omega of g of n,
if for every n beyond n 0 t of n lies above
c times g of n for some fixed constant c.
So, here we have the same thing we have an
initial thing that we are not interested in,
because at this point nothing can be said.
But beyond this n 0 we have that t of n lies
above so, t of n is always above c times g
of n
So, we earlier saw that n cubed is not big
O of n square, but intuitively n cube should
be lying above n square and this is certainly
the case because, n cubed is greater than
equal to n square for every n bigger than
equal to 1 right. So, at n equal to 1 both
are 1, but n equal to 2 this will be 8 this
will be 4 and so, on. So, if given n 0 equal
to 0 or n 0 equal to 1 and c equal to 1 we
can establish this. Now of course, when we
are establishing an upper bound we are usually
talking of about the algorithm we have. You
are saying this algorithm has an upper bound
of so, much and therefore, I can definitely
solve the problem within this much time. Now,
when we are talking about lower bounds it
is not that useful to talk about a specific
algorithm. It is not so useful to say that
this algorithm takes at least so much time.
What we would like to say is something like
this problem takes at least so much time,
no matter how you write the algorithm it is
going to take at least so much time. So, typically
what we would like to do to make a useful
lower bound statement is to say that a problem
takes a certain amount of time no matter how
you try to solve it. So, the problem has a
lower bound rather than the algorithm has
a lower bound.
Now, as you might imagine this is the fairly
complex thing to say because what you have
to able to show is that no matter how clever
you are, no matter how you design an algorithm
you cannot do better than a certain thing.
This is much harder than saying I have a specific
way of doing it and I am analyzing how to
do that. So, establishing lower bounds is
often very tricky. One of the areas where
lower bounds have been established is sorting.
So, it can be shown that, if you are relying
on comparing values to sort them then, you
must at least do n log n comparisons, no matter
how you actually do the sorting. No matter
how clever your sorting algorithm, it cannot
be faster than n log n in terms of comparing
elements but, this hard to do, remember, because
you have to really show this independent of
the algorithm.
Now, we could have a nice situation where
we have matching upper and lower bounds. So,
we say that t is theta of g of n if it is
both, big O of g of n and omega of g of n.
In other words, with suitable constants t
of n can be dominated by g of n, and it also
lies above g of n for two different constants
of course. So, what this really means is that,
t of n and g of n are basically are of the
same order of magnitude, they are essentially
the same function therefore, you have reached
a kind of optimum value.
So, as an example we can say for instance
that n into n minus 1 by 2 is theta of n square.
In order to prove something like this, we
have to show that there is an upper bound,
that is we can find a constant such that c
times n square dominates this and a lower
bound. There is another constant such that
c times n square is below this. So, for the
upper bound we just expand out n into n minus
1 by 2. So, we get n squared by 2 in the first
term and n minus n by 2. Now, since it is
an upper bound n squared by 2 minus n by 2,
if I ignore n by 2, this is going to be less
than n squared by 2.
Therefore, now I have an upper bound saying
that, with the constant half this is dominated
by n square for n bigger than 0. On the other
hand, if I want to do a lower bound then,
I will say same thing I will expand out n
into n minus 2, I will get same expression.
And now I will want to lower bound, so, now
what I will do is I will make this even smaller.
I will say that I subtract not n by 2 but
n by 2 times n by 2. So, this will be bigger
than this, because I am subtracting more.
n squared by 2 minus n by 2 will be bigger
than n squared by 2 minus n by 2 into n by
2, but this is again n squared by 4. So, I
have n squared by 2 minus n squared by 4,
so this simplifies to n squared by 4. In other
words, I have shown that n into n minus 1
by 2 is bigger than equal to n squared by
4. But now, in order to justify this, to justify
that n by 2 is increasing, n must be at least
2. Because if n smaller than 2 this is a fraction
so I am actually reducing.
Here, I have a different n, I have n greater
than equal to 2. I have established a lower
bound which says that for n bigger than equal
to 2 n into n minus 1 by 2 is above one fourth
of n square. So, therefore now if we chose
our constant to be 2 for all values bigger
than 2, I have that n into n minus 1 by 2
is less than half of n square and n into n
minus 2 is bigger than one fourth of n square.
So, I have found this matching upper and lower
bound which shows that n into n minus 1 by
2 is theta of n square.
So, to summarize when we use big O, we have
discovered an upper bound. If we say f of
n is big O of g of n, it means that g of n
dominates f of n so f of n is no bigger than
g of n. And this is useful to describe the
limit of a worst case running time. So, we
can say that worst running time is upper bounded
by g of n. On the other hand, if we use omega
we are saying that f of n is at least g of
n, g of n is a lower bound for f of n.
As we described this is more useful for problems
as a whole, sorting as a general problem rather
than for individual algorithm. Because it
tells us no matter how you do something, you
will have to spend at least that much time,
but this hard to establish. And if you have
a situation where a lower bound has been established
for a problem and you find an algorithm which
achieves the same bound as an upper bound
then, you have found in some sense the best
possible algorithm. Because, you cannot do
any better than g of n because we have a lower
bound of g of n and you have achieved g of
n because you have shown your algorithm is
big O of g of n. So, theta is a way of demonstrating
that you have found an algorithm which is
asymptotically as efficient as possible.